README.md, before:

# Green AI 🌱

A curated overview of resources for reducing the environmental footprint of AI development and usage.


## Tools

- CodeCarbon [[Website]](https://codecarbon.io/) [[GitHub]](https://github.com/mlco2/codecarbon) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.08354.pdf)
- AIPowerMeter [[Website]](https://greenai-uppa.github.io/AIPowerMeter/) [[GitHub]](https://github.com/GreenAI-Uppa/AIPowerMeter)
- CarbonAI [[GitHub]](https://github.com/Capgemini-Invent-France/CarbonAI)
- carbontracker [[GitHub]](https://github.com/lfwa/carbontracker) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.03051.pdf)
- Eco2AI [[GitHub]](https://github.com/sb-ai-lab/Eco2AI) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2208.00406.pdf)
- experiment-impact-tracker [[GitHub]](https://github.com/Breakend/experiment-impact-tracker) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.05651.pdf)
- powermeter [[GitHub]](https://github.com/autoai-incubator/powermeter)
- pyJoules [[GitHub]](https://github.com/powerapi-ng/pyJoules)
- tracarbon [[GitHub]](https://github.com/fvaleye/tracarbon)
- zeus [[Website]](https://ml.energy/zeus) [[GitHub]](https://github.com/ml-energy/zeus) [[Paper]](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/nsdi23-you.pdf)


## Papers

Particularly important papers are highlighted.


- **Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP** (Strubell et al. 2019) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.02243.pdf)
- Quantifying the Carbon Emissions of Machine Learning (Lacoste et al. 2019) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1910.09700.pdf)
- **Green AI** (Schwartz et al. 2020) [[Paper]](https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2020/12/248800-green-ai/fulltext) [[Notes]](notes/schwartz2020.md)
- Carbontracker: Tracking and Predicting the Carbon Footprint of Training Deep Learning Models (Anthony et al. 2020) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.03051.pdf)
- Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network Training (Patterson, et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2104/2104.10350.pdf)
- Green Algorithms: Quantifying the Carbon Footprint of Computation (Lannelongue et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202100707)
- A Pratical Guide to Quantifying Carbon Emissions for Machine Learning researchers and practitioners (Ligozat et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03376391/document)
- **Aligning artificial intelligence with climate change mitigation** (Kaack et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03368037/document)
- New universal sustainability metrics to assess edge intelligence (Lenherr et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210537921000718?via%3Dihub)
- Unraveling the Hidden Environmental Impacts of AI Solutions for Environment Life Cycle Assessment of AI Solutions (Ligozat et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.11822.pdf)
- Measuring the Carbon Intensity of AI in Cloud Instances (Dodge et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2206.05229.pdf)
- Estimating the Carbon Footprint of BLOOM a 176B Parameter Language Model (Luccioni et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.02001.pdf)
- Bridging Fairness and Environmental Sustainability in Natural Language Processing (Hessenthaler et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.04256.pdf)
- Eco2AI: carbon emissions tracking of machine learning models as the first step towards sustainable AI (Budennyy et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2208.00406.pdf)
- Environmental assessment of projects involving AI methods (Lefèvre et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://hal.science/hal-03922093v1/document)
- Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities (Wu et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.00364.pdf)
- The Carbon Footprint of Machine Learning Training Will Plateau, Then Shrink (Patterson et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2204/2204.05149.pdf)
- Towards the Systematic Reporting of the Energy and Carbon Footprints of Machine Learning (Henderson et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.05651.pdf)
- Towards Sustainable Artificial Intelligence: An Overview of Environmental Protection Uses and Issues (Pachot et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2212/2212.11738.pdf)
- **Measuring the Environmental Impacts of Artificial Intelligence Compute and Applications** (OECD 2022) [[Paper]](https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/7babf571-en.pdf?expires=1701262318&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=FAB39144A63BB5953FF7D56D7C18B147)
- Method and evaluations of the effective gain of artificial intelligence models for reducing CO2 emissions (Delanoë et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030147972300049X)
- Making AI Less "Thirsty": Uncovering and Addressing the Secret Water Footprint of AI Models (Li et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03271.pdf)
- Zeus: Understanding and Optimizing GPU Energy Consumption of DNN Training (You et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/you)
- Chasing Low-Carbon Electricity for Practical and Sustainable DNN Training (Yang et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/iclr2023/29)
- LLMCarbon: Modeling the End-To-End Carbon Footprint of Large Language Models (Faiz et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.14393.pdf)

<!-- - How to shrink AI's ballooning carbon footprint (Gibney et al. 2022) [[Paper]]() -->

### Survey papers

- Evaluating the carbon footprint of NLP methods: a survey and analysis of existing tools (Bannour et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://aclanthology.org/2021.sustainlp-1.2.pdf)
- **A Survey on Green Deep Learning** (Xu et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.05193.pdf) [[Notes]](notes/xu2021.md)
- **A Systematic Review of Green AI** (Verdecchia et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2301.11047.pdf)
- Counting Carbon: A Survey of Factors Influencing the Emissions of Machine Learning (Luccioni et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.08476v1.pdf)

### Green AI and Federated Learning

- Savazzi 2021: A framework for energy and carbon footprint analysis of distributed and federated edge learning (Savazzi et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2103.10346.pdf) [[Notes]](notes/savazzi2021.md)
- A first look into the carbon footprint of federated learning (Qiu et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.07627.pdf) [[Notes]](notes/qiu2022.md)

<!-- ### Green AI and Edge Computing -->

<!-- - Energy efficient AI on[Shah 2020: Energy efficient AI on Edge]() -->
<!-- - [Shah 2020: Energy efficient AI on Edge]() -->
<!-- 	- Training AI models results in huge carbon emissions -->
<!-- 	- Our approach for carbon efficient AI -->
<!-- 		- Pruning -->
<!-- 		- Quantization -->
<!-- 	- My thoughts: Ikke så dyp analyse. Kun en presentasjon, ikke ordentlig artikkel. Snakker bare om pruning ig quantization. -->

## Other resources

- [Awesome Green AI](https://github.com/samuelrince/awesome-green-ai/tree/main) by [samuelrince](https://github.com/samuelrince)

Commit message:

Add calculation tools and more papers

README.md, after:

# Green AI 🌱

A curated overview of resources for reducing the environmental footprint of AI development and usage.


## Tools

### Tools for measuring

- CodeCarbon [[Website]](https://codecarbon.io/) [[GitHub]](https://github.com/mlco2/codecarbon) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.08354.pdf)
- AIPowerMeter [[Website]](https://greenai-uppa.github.io/AIPowerMeter/) [[GitHub]](https://github.com/GreenAI-Uppa/AIPowerMeter)
- CarbonAI [[GitHub]](https://github.com/Capgemini-Invent-France/CarbonAI)
- carbontracker [[GitHub]](https://github.com/lfwa/carbontracker) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.03051.pdf)
- Eco2AI [[GitHub]](https://github.com/sb-ai-lab/Eco2AI) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2208.00406.pdf)
- experiment-impact-tracker [[GitHub]](https://github.com/Breakend/experiment-impact-tracker) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.05651.pdf)
- powermeter [[GitHub]](https://github.com/autoai-incubator/powermeter)
- pyJoules [[GitHub]](https://github.com/powerapi-ng/pyJoules)
- tracarbon [[GitHub]](https://github.com/fvaleye/tracarbon)
- zeus [[Website]](https://ml.energy/zeus) [[GitHub]](https://github.com/ml-energy/zeus) [[Paper]](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/nsdi23-you.pdf)

### Tools for calculation/estimation

The following tools are designed to calculate the footprint based on information about the choice of algorithms, configuration and hardware.

- Green Algorithms [[Website]](http://calculator.green-algorithms.org/) [[Paper]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/advs.202100707)
- ML CO2 Impact [[Website]](https://mlco2.github.io/impact/) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1910.09700.pdf)

## Papers

Particularly important papers are highlighted.


- **Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP** (Strubell et al. 2019) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.02243.pdf)
- Quantifying the Carbon Emissions of Machine Learning (Lacoste et al. 2019) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1910.09700.pdf)
- **Green AI** (Schwartz et al. 2020) [[Paper]](https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2020/12/248800-green-ai/fulltext) [[Notes]](notes/schwartz2020.md)
- Carbontracker: Tracking and Predicting the Carbon Footprint of Training Deep Learning Models (Anthony et al. 2020) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.03051.pdf)
- Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network Training (Patterson, et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2104/2104.10350.pdf)
- Chasing Carbon: The Elusive Environmental Footprint of Computing (Gupta et al. 2020) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2011.02839.pdf)
- Green Algorithms: Quantifying the Carbon Footprint of Computation (Lannelongue et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202100707)
- A Pratical Guide to Quantifying Carbon Emissions for Machine Learning researchers and practitioners (Ligozat et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03376391/document)
- **Aligning artificial intelligence with climate change mitigation** (Kaack et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03368037/document)
- New universal sustainability metrics to assess edge intelligence (Lenherr et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210537921000718?via%3Dihub)
- Unraveling the Hidden Environmental Impacts of AI Solutions for Environment Life Cycle Assessment of AI Solutions (Ligozat et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.11822.pdf)
- Measuring the Carbon Intensity of AI in Cloud Instances (Dodge et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2206.05229.pdf)
- Estimating the Carbon Footprint of BLOOM a 176B Parameter Language Model (Luccioni et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.02001.pdf)
- Bridging Fairness and Environmental Sustainability in Natural Language Processing (Hessenthaler et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.04256.pdf)
- Eco2AI: carbon emissions tracking of machine learning models as the first step towards sustainable AI (Budennyy et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2208.00406.pdf)
- Environmental assessment of projects involving AI methods (Lefèvre et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://hal.science/hal-03922093v1/document)
- Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities (Wu et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.00364.pdf)
- The Carbon Footprint of Machine Learning Training Will Plateau, Then Shrink (Patterson et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2204/2204.05149.pdf)
- Towards the Systematic Reporting of the Energy and Carbon Footprints of Machine Learning (Henderson et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.05651.pdf)
- Towards Sustainable Artificial Intelligence: An Overview of Environmental Protection Uses and Issues (Pachot et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2212/2212.11738.pdf)
- **Measuring the Environmental Impacts of Artificial Intelligence Compute and Applications** (OECD 2022) [[Paper]](https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/7babf571-en.pdf?expires=1701262318&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=FAB39144A63BB5953FF7D56D7C18B147)
- Method and evaluations of the effective gain of artificial intelligence models for reducing CO2 emissions (Delanoë et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030147972300049X)
- Making AI Less "Thirsty": Uncovering and Addressing the Secret Water Footprint of AI Models (Li et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03271.pdf)
- Zeus: Understanding and Optimizing GPU Energy Consumption of DNN Training (You et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/you)
- Chasing Low-Carbon Electricity for Practical and Sustainable DNN Training (Yang et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/iclr2023/29)
- LLMCarbon: Modeling the End-To-End Carbon Footprint of Large Language Models (Faiz et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.14393.pdf)

<!-- - How to shrink AI's ballooning carbon footprint (Gibney et al. 2022) [[Paper]]() -->

### Survey papers

- Evaluating the carbon footprint of NLP methods: a survey and analysis of existing tools (Bannour et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://aclanthology.org/2021.sustainlp-1.2.pdf)
- **A Survey on Green Deep Learning** (Xu et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.05193.pdf) [[Notes]](notes/xu2021.md)
- **A Systematic Review of Green AI** (Verdecchia et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2301.11047.pdf)
- Counting Carbon: A Survey of Factors Influencing the Emissions of Machine Learning (Luccioni et al. 2023) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.08476v1.pdf)

### Green AI and Federated Learning

- Savazzi 2021: A framework for energy and carbon footprint analysis of distributed and federated edge learning (Savazzi et al. 2021) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2103.10346.pdf) [[Notes]](notes/savazzi2021.md)
- A first look into the carbon footprint of federated learning (Qiu et al. 2022) [[Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.07627.pdf) [[Notes]](notes/qiu2022.md)

<!-- ### Green AI and Edge Computing -->

<!-- - Energy efficient AI on[Shah 2020: Energy efficient AI on Edge]() -->
<!-- - [Shah 2020: Energy efficient AI on Edge]() -->
<!-- 	- Training AI models results in huge carbon emissions -->
<!-- 	- Our approach for carbon efficient AI -->
<!-- 		- Pruning -->
<!-- 		- Quantization -->
<!-- 	- My thoughts: Ikke så dyp analyse. Kun en presentasjon, ikke ordentlig artikkel. Snakker bare om pruning ig quantization. -->

## Other resources

- [Awesome Green AI](https://github.com/samuelrince/awesome-green-ai/tree/main) by [samuelrince](https://github.com/samuelrince)
